the kind of flowchart involved here is
step one is people having interest in
veganism step two is that they go on the
internet and learn more about veganism
then step three is some talented
minority those people get organized to
do you know lobbying education outreach
activism but it is true the metrics
we're looking at here are only looking
at that first step however it's also out
of that broader public interest that you
get donor support for the movement so on
and so forth so when you have declining
interest it's it's true I'm conceding
the point here declining public interest
is not the same as the decline of the
movement however I think you have to
sound the alarm when you're looking at
several years of decline in interest
yeah and as you know in the video I make
the point if I were using these
statistics to tell you the opposite
which we all were just a few years ago I
mean I don't know how long you've been
in the vegan movement but just five
years ago everyone was pointing to the
same type of statistics and saying hey
look the amount of interest in veganism
is doubling and tripling and so on that
was quite appropriate at the time I mean
I think you probably know what was
inappropriate or unfortunate about it
was that it led people to a sense of
reckless optimism about where or social
media would take us so that's why I
think it's so meaningful to reflect
right now where is social media taking
us as the tide goes down as those
numbers are going down yeah right
so I think it's good that the discussion
that was started by the video people did
follow up so you know I followed up by
putting together a list of I think about
28 YouTube channels and crunching the
numbers on those and then that inspired
my friend Theo so I won't use Theo's
full name but you know his YouTube
channel was actually called activist
journeys but I sent you that so the
discussion led to looking for more
statistics to back up what the first
video showed and Theo put together the
list of I think it's 286 youtubers and
that is and then you folded up further
so okay all right
try to put this in a sign soundbite
thought-form okay it's true the first
step was to look at google trend data
and then to look at a survey of vegan
youtubers we then move that forward from
about 28 YouTube channels to about 300
YouTube channels and you've got the link
for the full list and then I pointed out
that even though that survey of 286 or
whatever it is even though that was
quite compelling data at that point the
real numbers were even worse because
that didn't include the channels that
had quit entirely the channels that have
been deleted and that started a further
effort to try to list the the deleted
channels so now we have that data also
so yeah when you when you add that
together it backs up my original
hypothesis so you're correct at the
first step of the first video the
numbers didn't prove the case when way
or the other but now I think it's it's
fair to say I've made my point I think
there are significant numbers to back
that up you okay no I do not but the so
the the all the hypothesis you're
hinting at would be if someone said that
during the last two years the total
viewership of YouTube had declined or
collapsed I don't think that's true so
I'm sorry you could Google around for
that as well as I could I mean again in
waterways we talked about a very short
span of time here I think that objection
was a lot more meaningful five years ago
when when veganism was increasing on
YouTube because five years ago you might
have made the point Oh we'll wait there
were more people interested in veganism
but also just more people are using
YouTube or then they're using it more
intensively than they did previously but
today I don't think that's that's true
at all I think YouTube has remained you
know really the dominant video platform
on the internet a but you know you can
google it but I don't think it's the
case the number of people using YouTube
is full on half
but know that I think that that's
actually an objection that applies well
to the the optimistic side of the story
when people were hopeful but I think
that for millions of people the
confrontation with slaughterhouse
footage and with the basic facts of
ecology in the way that YouTube
delivered it
was tremendously meaningful and changed
their lives forever
I was already vegan when I saw that
stuff on YouTube but it impacted me and
it still impacts me like I edit
slaughterhouse footage no it still has
an effect on me you know to this day and
I think there's no doubt that hearing
people talk about fitness and diet and
exercise and all of those things also
there's a unique power of hearing that
in your own language and often someone
of your own age group - you know retired
people can hear elderly people talking
about this stuff and get the message hey
you can do it you know you can hear
someone in their 60s talk about becoming
vegan in their 60s and teenagers can
your teenagers talk about it I think
there is something uniquely powerful and
significant to the role YouTube has
played for veganism in the last five
years the problem is that it led us led
many of us into a reckless sort of
self-confidence about what would happen
next with the vegan movement and here's
what I would emphasize to you if
veganism is not increasing on that trend
chart then we're losing if the line is
just stagnating then that means our
movement is losing because as you know
millions of animals are dying every day
the Earth's ecology is being destroyed
and also human beings are dying of heart
attacks and cancer that could be avoided
it's never going to satisfy us to
stagnate especially not at this stage
where were a tiny despised minority but
as long as the the arrow on the chart
was going up up up people could delude
themselves and I still hear this
literally to this day I heard it just
yesterday from Kerry France I own a in a
YouTube video I heard it from that vegan
couple a couple days ago I hear people
saying optimistically if only you could
go out and convince one of your friends
to be vegan and then next year your
friend convinces one verse to be vegan
then you know within five years the
number will have doubled and doubled
I've heard that set at so many keynote
addresses speeches lectures from
academic contacts
- - activist context people could delude
themselves into thinking that was
working when that Google trend line was
going up up up when the YouTube views
were going up up up okay it wasn't true
then and it's not true now and if the
line is either stagnating or declining I
think that makes us face up to the fact
that that optimism was misplaced okay um
I think it's misleading misleading think
about the meaning of the word misleading
misleading doesn't mean anyone's lying
to you it doesn't mean there's a scam
you know it doesn't mean there's a fraud
but people are being misled by that you
could have the same number of vegans
living in a city and all of them are
scraping by with eating at the same
restaurants as meat-eaters and you can
also have the same number of vegans in a
city and there are many successful vegan
restaurants because they literally cater
to meat eaters you know that that that
commercial aspect it's not that it's bad
it's just that it's misleading so I
currently live in a very small city in
Taiwan here I'll just google and give
you the population here population I
live in a city of 80,000 people and
there were about 50 vegan restaurants
here about five o if you include
variously if you include like small
hotdog stands as restaurants we only
include like a big building maybe the
number is more like thirty in Chinese
culture a lot of restaurants are very
informal more like hot dogs damn um all
of those restaurants are making their
living selling vegan food to meat eaters
who sometimes eat a vegan meal that's
the mass market so that's not evil but
that has become normalized in Chinese
culture the vast majority of Chinese
people eat tofu several times per week
they also eat pork several times per
week so it's very misleading to point to
tofu sales and say people are buying
more tofu and to conclude
that more people are ethical vegans or
even that more people are V are non
ethical vegans but who have some kind of
mandate to create a vegan society to
support the being a movement well that's
it that's why they use the term yeah
they're conscious flesh it's West yes I
think they're also sleepwalking what's
those are people have really chosen to
describe himself that way see yeah
they've actively rejected rejected
veganism well look so I just made a
video now like within the last hour
um and I already just got hate mail for
it before if it's two seconds for
conversation but you know I'm
fundamentally optimistic because I do
not think veganism needs to have 10% of
the population supporting it to succeed
so I just repeat that what I didn't
misspeak I don't think veganism needs a
hundred percent I don't think it needs
fifty percent
I don't think it needs ten percent in
the same way that the gay rights
movement was enormous ly successful in
Canada and not even one percent of
people really supported it like in terms
of being activists involved in it you
know in the same way you can have a
talented organized minority of vegans
who really effectively advocate for
victims that's what my hope rests on so
I am actually very optimistic about the
future of the vegan movement what I'm
not optimistic about is lifestyle
activism on the Internet
which has dominated veganism for
approximately five years now I could
reflect even within my own life I'm 40
years old
I can remember other waves of vegan and
animal rights activism that really had a
very different character you you may or
may not remember within England
especially there was the anarcho
primitive esta period totally different
character and some of those guys are
still around here but that was really
big in England they had publications and
everything and that was framing that was
framing animal rights in terms of being
anti civilization and anti-technology
very different men so you know um
different one of course within England
you guys had the whole al F the sort of
militant tattoos on the side your head
style of home vegan active not even
animal rights activism whether or not
there with you
you know rescuing dolphins from from
zoos and stuff and getting put in prison
for it so I mean different waves have
come and gone I think you know what I'm
trying to do is draw people's attach to
the fact that this wave actually is on
the way out now and it's it's really
time to ask what's next but I am
fundamentally optimistic because I don't
see the objective of veganism being
convincing people to eat a vegan diet
who don't want to I really see the phase
right now as being recruiting talented
hard-working people to get out and make
the same kind of difference that
somebody like Ralph Nader made Ralph
Nader was an activist for car safety in
the United States nobody cared about car
safety he didn't have 50% of Americans
supporting him he didn't even have 10%
of Americans Boreum less than 1% of
Americans cared at all about car safety
but they cared a lot because a lot of
them were people where you know their
cousin had died or their brother had
died in a car accident yet a small
well-organized passionate minority of
people who really had a big impact
politically including through public
education okay so the I'll answer in a
way that draws it back to my original
video so the original video where I'm in
black and white you notice at one point
I put up on screen the number of
supporters people have on patreon isn't
it amazing that you only have to
convince 300 people that you have a good
idea to get enough funding and support
to take action on that idea that's what
I'm optimistic about so think of how
hard it would have been in 1965 to
photocopy some pamphlets and convince
300 people to support you like
financially ultimately you know maybe
with their time and effort also mmm the
threshold for success when you're
looking at veganism ethically and and
politically like in terms just pure plug
is now really low like I only know gee I
only need to commit to 300 people I've
got a good idea that's powerful so
that's that's where the potential lies
and I think that's that's obviously a
really pause development that's come out
of the silliness and the exuberance of
the last five years
of vegan activism being preoccupied with
the internet this way yes money fame
power sex not necessarily in this order
these are really powerful motives and
they they have you know driven people
and rewarded people to devote their
devote their lives to YouTube and in
some cases to vegan activism in a way
that nothing else would have now if you
talk to people who are really honest
those elements were always present in
politics and in even in dissident
activist politics in the 1960s and 1970s
I met a very sincere anti-vietnam war
protester but he you know he heated a
lecture to her he was a famous quote he
wasn't just an overdose he was a leader
or whatever and he admitted to me that
you know he slept with an unbelievable
number of young women in that period and
they I guess literally 1970s going
around being a charismatic speaker for
you know against the Vietnam War and
what a contrast this was to other their
political causes in his life you know so
I mean those those elements have always
been there maybe it's ultimately healthy
that the Internet has forced us to face
up to those things in a somewhat a
transparent way that it kind of holds up
the mirror for us to see that and to see
you know who's motivated about what so
look whether or not using the article I
just say I am really aware the United
Kingdom and England specifically has a
unique history in veganism vegetarianism
and animal rights it's unique for better
and worse you guys were also the home of
the most extreme animal rights terrorism
that I think really set the movement
back by the years it created many
negative stereotypes about animal rights
and haunted us for many years you have a
lot of terrible cases please that way
however England has a uniquely powerful
history with animal rights and it's the
country where the word vegan was created
the first vegan society created so and
so forth my concern is this
what percentage of the people who now
eat a vegan diet are in any way
supporting vegan activism or the future
of the movement I am right now living in
the most extreme case study possible
where vegan restaurants are everywhere
vegan food products are everywhere they
literally have vegan beef jerky at
7-eleven here ok but the vegan movement
is nowhere it's non-existent
there's no vegan movement here where
veganism has just settled into the
economy and the culture as a type of
restaurant and a type of debt and chill
some of these people are ethical vegans
but they're still not part of a movement
they're still not pushing for social
change they're still not trying to
achieve a vegan society I should even
say that a vegan society is too big
they're still not trying to end the
slaughter of animals you know that's you
know basically to end mechanized
slaughterhouses is a reasonable minimum
goal for vision ISM if you're not
working towards that you know from my
perspective it's like well we can have
all the processed tofu beef jerky for
sale you want but we're still not really
making progress as a movement so that's
a different kind of threat and a
different kind of concern well I ask you
this too because I mean this is a
sincere human question again you could
use this in Eric we gave it open the
article biases epithet achill question
have you been to a vegan picnic you know
could vegan meet-and-greet where many
people you don't already know and you're
shocked that the people there only talk
about food like there's no quit so maybe
you don't maybe when you go to those
kinds of events in England maybe you go
to them you meet vegans and they were
also concerned about you know politics
in the future the milkman this kind of
thing but let me says in Canada like
that's 99.9 percent of the people you
meet and they're people who are
committed to the vegan diet and they
they don't give a [ __ ] they have no
interest they do not care they do not
think in terms of this being a movement
that's progressing towards a goal of
actually closing down slaughterhouses
you know they have no so again it's not
even a question of active or pardon me
it's not a distinction between people
who are activists and people who are non
activists you know it's it's kind of
inert vegans versus vegans who really
are working towards you know the
creation of the vegan society pushing
towards those goals which you know again
they may do that by donating money or
they may do that by watching YouTube
videos let's be honest a lot of people
are not going to be activists but
they're still going to be vegans pushing
for social change if we look I was gonna
say even though you're only talking
you're only talking to one person at it
for one person at a time when you go to
a picnic like that I think I find you
can really hear in their voice like you
know they'll put up with you if you're
talking about ethics and politics and
activism you know slaughterhouses or
animals but then you see what they're
really interested in talking about is
like the difference between authentic
and inauthentic Thai food like I know a
lot of stuff about food like that but I
don't care about it cuz I've lived in
Thailand and you know I've been vegan
and I'm sure like I really do not want
to tell you the difference between Thai
food in the United States and telling it
is of absolutely no it I dunno I have an
answer to the questions you I could talk
to you for an hour
about that topic and I could tell you
about where the best Thai restaurants
are in Seattle and you know in Paris
France but I have absolutely no interest
in that you know what I'm interest so I
just say even though it's on that human
scale it's not gonna be it's not gonna
be data I think a lot of us walk away
from those social engagements with the
chilling sense of the hollowness of some
of those statistics about about veganism
so yeah when I look around at something
like the metrics you've heard me discuss
at such length who's actually interested
in veganism and who's interested in
vegan activism and you know why is it
that someone someone who's genuinely
famous within the movement like Gary
France aione has so few people who are
interested in hearing what he has to say
and so on I think those are all really
meaningful of warnings for us to kind of
pay attention to yeah look you should
mention that in the same article because
I mean I think that's the same
I think that's another kind of indirect
metric when you're looking at the
numbers for your own articles it's like
well what if we actually have a problem
with people just being interested in
food and again it's not I'm not saying
that's evil
I'm saying it's misleading you know yeah
you know for me it was it was really
depressing going to vegan events in
places like Vancouver and Victoria and
you know you should ask you should ask
questions if there's anything you want
to know but yeah you know what when I
need other people who are vegan I do
have the expectation that we're gonna be
kindred spirits in the sense I do think
that were people who have you know we've
witnessed the horror of industrial
animal agriculture and we share a common
motivation to one day change it to one
day you know erase it from the world and
you know if you're looking around saying
hey wait is this what we've got to work
with is this the movement the the
movement is not the marketing of
packaged products they're just two very
fundamentally different things I went to
a vegan conference here in Taiwan in the
capital city in Taipei and it was an
enormous event and the only thing I
noticed conference is probably not the
right word I guess convention it was a
convention at a Convention Center
all this is in Chinese of course and the
actual venue you could go up about three
floors and look down at the Convention
Center for you get a bird's-eye view it
was nothing but food industry it was
absolutely nothing but history and you
know included some big corporations and
also some small niche corporations and
change the chains of restaurants and
stuff but I mean that was it there was
there was I was expecting there to at
least be representation of kind of
Buddhist religious movements or Taoist
religious movements or something no I
mean it was like going to a comic book
and
or a Star Wars convention where it's
just the industry that profits our - was
this huge convention so now again
as a vegan I'm not gonna tell you that's
bad it's not bad it's worrying you know
I'm concerned and you know when you look
around when you look around the kind of
projects you'd like to do as an activist
and say well okay it's not just why
can't I do this or how difficult it
gonna be for me to do this I think you
have the answer to the question why is
it that nobody else is doing this
already kind of thing right and I think
the other question is as it gets easier
and easier you get a lower and lower
caliber of person with less and less
motivation who's who's joining so that
you might you might use this in the
article so I just draw your attention
this is this an interesting and true
anecdote you could use in the article if
you look at the statistics you know my
education is in political science
including this kind of social sciences
if you look at the statistics it seems
as if cigarettes are becoming more
addictive decade by decade it's an
illusion the reality is the people who
find it easy to quit smoking already
quit smoking so like in the decade of
the 1950s 60s 70s all the people who
find like once it's clear that
cigarettes cause cancer and they're bad
for health generally all the people who
could quit smoking easily already quit
smoking so as you move forward in time
chronologically through the 1980s and
1990s it seems as if cigarettes are more
addictive and the people who do quit a
higher percentage of them have a higher
recidivism rate the higher percentage
return and so on you have something
similar with veganism the people who
find it easy to see a video of
slaughterhouse conditions or read some
simple facts but the ecology or whatever
it is
the people who can respond to the facts
by saying wow I have to do the right
thing because it's the right thing to do
you know those people well they're it's
going to seem that there are fewer and
fewer of them because the people for
whom that's easy they've already done it
already made that change so I think I
don't have any one word for that I don't
have a snappy
you know title to put on that phenomenon
but that's because it's not the same as
a point of diminishing returns if the
point is that the people who are highly
motivated have already done it the
people who find it easy psychologically
have already done it and then you're
getting deeper and deeper into the part
of the population who are reluctant or
unable or you know who lacked whatever
peculiar form of talent it is to take
that step right oh okay your point with
another point or answer your question
with another question um what about the
difference between a movement where you
think you could have real outcomes you
think you can make a difference and one
where you can't so one reason why people
showed up for anti-vietnam War protests
was that they really had the delusion
that they could end war that they could
have an impact in American politics you
know actually I would actually say that
was a dilution I think I really do not
think that protesters marching in the
street with signs had any impact on when
the Vietnam War ended and now but the
belief that you can make a difference or
that there are real outcomes now you
know I am opposed to the old illegal
methods of of animal Rights Act I really
am I'm totally morally poseable however
you can see that obviously part of what
motivated those people was the fact that
if they stole a dolphin you know they
got to see that dolphin go free and I
saw an interview with a
multi-millionaire you could google this
you probably have the story on on PBS
there was a multi-millionaire who was
one of the co-creators of the TV show
The Simpsons
you know the Bart Simpson Lisa Simpson
so he had millions and millions of
dollars and you know he got so
frustrated with other forms of activism
that at the very end of his life the
less Cochlear's he spent all his money
on Direct Animal Liberation but which I
mean like buying all the animals in a
circus and setting them free so sleek is
either multi billionaire but like we
literally like buy elephants you know I
would
and stuff and he said you know the
reason I do this now is because all the
other forms of charity I donate it to
and although the good forms there was no
tangible outcome there was nothing you
could see there was no impact so this
this has a double-edged sword for us you
know five years ago people said vegans
said come here on YouTube do you uh in
skin tight clothing show off your body
tell people how happy you are being
vegan and you'll get outcomes to go to
see Theo comes and we all know there's a
sense in which that's true and there's a
sense in which it's complete [ __ ]
you know K now what happens when all the
money disappears from that game what
happens when all the other motivations
disappear from that game you know now
we're left really you don't wondering
we're having to look at at a new chapter
for veganism in many ways as you know I
think that was kind of a dangerous
distraction for the movement but you can
also say okay so what are the lessons
learned now going forward because people
are very profoundly motivated by
outcomes they can see or touch or hear
and even if that outcome is just that a
bunch of people send you email saying
hey I saw you doing yoga in your skin
tight outfit and you know what that
motivated me to try going on a vegan
diet you know I'm going to understand
people did get some positive
encouragement from that that made them
feel this really was a viable form of
activism people really believed it was
going to save the planet
and it was going to change the world
yeah I think the next step is going to
be challenging education and children's
entertainment I think that's the next
step the challenge to education I think
is literally gonna be vegans organizing
to challenge whats in textbooks in
schools everything from health to you
know how the slaughter of animals is
depicted various things having to do
with ecology and what-have-you and yeah
sorry so there's a whole range of things
I think they'll formally challenge in
school curricula in how how schools
teach ecology
animals what-have-you and then I think
there's gonna be a war so that that's
obviously a more hostile process of
negotiations and objections
what-have-you and then I think there's
gonna be a more positive and creative
element of vegans having to create new
storybooks and new movies and new
cartoons and if trying to challenge the
culture that way I think that's I think
that's probably the the next the next
step yes and comic books - sir comic
books are another very important example
yeah I do
and I mean for me I can now look back on
my life in my childhood and I can see
how many ideas about the world I got
from from comic books as a child you
know the extent to what's your view of
the world is shaped by these one of the
examples really for my grandparents
generation was the original movie Bambi
showing people shooting a deer you know
you know it's corn it's something it's
no matter a joking thing but no whole
generation of people were shocked and
horrified by watching Bambi die in that
cartoon yeah well I think I think you're
getting into a great topic for a
separate article here but you know um
another example I like to point to is in
black American culture the significance
of kung-fu movies so really is starting
in the 1970s black Americans started
watching Hong Kong Chinese kung-fu
movies and like many famous rappers and
black celebrities most of them became
vegetarian because of those movies and
then 20 years later they became vegan a
lot of those guys are vegan now and you
know I've heard them talk about this
this is not me putting words in their
mouth it was really meaningful for them
as black Americans to have these action
heroes who were not white and not
Christian and who talked about Buddhist
philosophy broadly speaking you know
that they got interested in
vegetarianism not in a soft-hearted
sense of saving Bambi you know not in a
kind of affair
or sympathetic sense this was part of a
tough you know um aggressive aesthetic a
heroic aesthetic the you you know the
action hero
you know was vegetarian that
vegetarianism was part of being a tough
guy and these kung fu movies so you know
my point being here there's a whole
range that includes Bambi and includes
Dumbo and probably includes things like
kung fu movies or you know science
fiction movies in which you know the
future is just implicitly vegan or that
comes up in some sense you know yeah I
mean I do think that's that's an area
that we're now you know there's there's
a lot of progress that can be made but
look I mean you asked me you asked me
what am i optimistic about you know I
think that it would be quite reasonable
for someone to criticize me and say well
that's that's really not all that
optimistic okay should we wrap it up for
now the next couple days I'm running off
of airplanes so it's not a good time to
talk to me but in general you know I
have nothing better to do and also I am
really sincerely passionate about the
future of the vegan movement this is
true yeah I completely lack the delusion
that what I do on veganism would be
interesting to a mass market yeah and
you know I think you can see this is
consonant with everything I've just been
talking about this conversation I look
at my audience like that that video in
black and white 2,000 people saw that
video you can say 2,000 people as a
small number of people well it's enough
people to make a big difference if you
really want to do something it's a lot a
lot of ideas get started with fewer than
2,000 people who believe in that idea
you know so right right right and you
know the message on delivering is not
easy to take but you know most of what
we need to do is cheap it just requires
you know highly talented hardware
being dedicated people to do it and as
they say that's that's the really
optimistic message buried in that video
is hey look to be successful at this you
only need to convince 300 people that
your project is worth funding and then
you know a project can get off the
ground yeah
[Music]